Jerry Michalski: This is the OGM Weekly Call for Thursday, October 23rd, 2025.
Jerry Michalski: Our topic today is, has progress stopped? And I was just starting down that path when I realized I hadn't turned on the recording, so now it's on.
Jerry Michalski: But there's some obvious questions like, hey, we're not flying any faster or traveling any faster than we did in the 1950s.
Jerry Michalski: what's up with that? There are other cultural questions. I was pointing to Ted Joya, who has really interesting.
Jerry Michalski: essays about popular culture and how the infinite scroll seems to be eating thoughtful culture, etc, etc, and I think we'll find other angles to put into the conversation as we go here.
Jerry Michalski: So, let me go with Alex.
Alex Kladitis: Hi, sorry, I had to speak up on this, because I think we're going to go down the intellectual route, and I do believe that one of the factors is
Alex Kladitis: That… With the way we have progressed, our civilization has progressed.
Alex Kladitis: There are so many Big interests that actually are beginning to work against
Alex Kladitis: progress. The exception is computing, IT, for some reason that has bucked the trend. But I would argue that if anything came out tomorrow.
Alex Kladitis: that… The best battery there ever was that would solve all the problems.
Alex Kladitis: the oil industry and the governments, and everybody will say it was too much impact to the economy of the world, therefore we'll buy it out, and that would be the end of it. So there's a… there's now an overweight…
Alex Kladitis: kind of… hegemonic Interests in the world economy.
Alex Kladitis: that are actually, in certain ways, suppressing progress, if the progress is going to be massive, disruptive, etc. And I know I've discussed this with many other people, and they'll say, oh, you're a conspiracy theorist, Alex, or whatever. But I actually think that's part of the cycle.
Alex Kladitis: Anyway, I just want to put that in before we go the intellectual route, which is also a very good route to go.
Jerry Michalski: I think that, you know, vested interests and the economics of progress are somewhat intellectual. I mean, they're not emotional, in the sense of it's not, you know, coming from some very different place. It's just a piece of the analysis, I think. So I paraphrased what you just said badly, probably, in the chat.
Jerry Michalski: Vested interests will kill most progress, that people who have, you know, whose golden goose will be killed.
Jerry Michalski: We'll make sure that any novel thing that endangers their business will not thrive? Is that what you mean?
Alex Kladitis: Yes, that's what I mean, yes
Alex Kladitis: And they're big enough to do it now.
Jerry Michalski: And we've…
Jerry Michalski: And we've seen plenty of things like this. I'll point to a favorite old example, which is the Great American Streetcar Conspiracy.
Jerry Michalski: in which, American… General Motors,
Jerry Michalski: Firestone, Phillips66, and Mack Truck wanted to sell bus…
Jerry Michalski: more buses in the US, so they bought up most of the light rail lines, which existed and were thriving, and then slowly turned down service and then shut down the lines.
Jerry Michalski: And because they realized that once you've pulled up the rails and burned the cars, nobody's gonna go install a brand new light rail line, and as a result, we have car culture, not…
Jerry Michalski: public transit culture, and we struggle. You know, Portland has what I consider an extremely wimpy.
Jerry Michalski: light rail system that kind of makes it around, and, you know, it's not good. And then you go to Berlin, and you drop in, or you go to any major international.
Mike Nelson: city.
Jerry Michalski: And you drop in, and you're like, OMG.
Rick Botelho: They have layers and layers of public transit, which is running all the time really snappy, and is, you know.
Jerry Michalski: Very serviceable, so…
Mike Nelson: I thought the tire companies were involved, too.
Jerry Michalski: Firestone.
Mike Nelson: Yeah. Oh, you did say that, okay.
Jerry Michalski: Yeah, and they got found for antitrust, but it was too late because blah blah blah. I mean, you know, the government found against them.
Jerry Michalski: the whole thing. Gil, please.
Jerry Michalski: And you're…
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Sorry, you were muted, but no, you're not. Good. Gotta hit some toggles.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So I think there's a question behind your question, Jerry, of what is progress.
Jerry Michalski: Yes, which, which Victoria asked in the chat.
Rick Botelho: Yeah.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I had asked in the chat above, and Pete thought I was asking the wrong question, but several of us were interested in going in that direction, number one. Number two, the example of transportation in European cities is… calls into question whether the lack of progress in the United States is about the lack of progress of humanity.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Progress may be highly localized. And, it seems to me there's progress in lots of areas. Do I have screen share?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I'll show you something?
Jerry Michalski: It's set by default for everybody.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Okay, let me just see if I can pop this open real quickly here.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Because if we look at, you know, if we look at things like energy transition, renewable energy, progress of the price and performance of renewable energy over the past 20, 30 years has been striking.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And, we are now… we now have more renewable energy being generated on the planet than coal-generated energy, and et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So there's, you know, there's… there's progress in some dimensions there. Let's see, desktop here…
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: For example, you know, stuff like that. So that would argue that there is progress, although, you know, climate degradation is proceeding apace, environmental degradation proceeding apace.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: personal in our lives, I'm looking at medical progress, and I have a wife who would not be alive.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: without certain kind of cancer research that's happened. I mean, in remission from a disease that, when she was first diagnosed, we were told, we were told would kill her in 2 years.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And she's now 11 years in and in remission.
Jerry Michalski: Wow. So I gotta, I gotta count that as progress.
Jerry Michalski: Yep.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So, so back to my… so my starting question is, when you say, you know, is progress ended, it's like, what do you mean by progress?
Jerry Michalski: Which is a great question to ask. I will say that
Jerry Michalski: How our energy is generated happens behind the curtain.
Jerry Michalski: And so we don't necessarily see it, and the electricity that shows up at the socket is the same electricity that showed up at the socket at 1950, so there's no perceived difference to our daily lives the way there would be if supersonic airplane travel had taken over. It would be like, oh my gosh, you can get to London in 2 hours instead of, you know, 9.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: although I now have an induction range, so I have a better cooking experience and less toxic pollution in my house and less fire risk with the same electricity. And the electricity comes from my roof.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: with a backup battery that switches over in microseconds if there's a power outage. So, yeah, it's the same electrons, but the overall experience is certainly better for me.
Jerry Michalski: And the electrons are having a much better time of it, so…
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I hope so.
Jerry Michalski: That's good.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So, point being, Jerry, that… so there's several layers of interpretation happening in this conversation, and I'd like to open them up and have them be.
Rick Botelho: Oh my god.
Jerry Michalski: I… that sounds great, and if you would like to step back in and propose…
Jerry Michalski: progress framework, some way we can kind of look at and separate out these things, that would be cool. I mean, I'm into that exploration, that sounds great.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I'm going to hold off on that and ask you what you… because you raised the question, what do you mean by progress? Give us a, you know, a framing or contextual definition of how that lives in you, because there's… you clearly have a strong, you know, you have interpretations and strong feelings about this, but let us… let us inside your brain case.
Jerry Michalski: That's funny. I…
Jerry Michalski: don't think I'm a proponent for the notion that progress has died. I am definitely not in that camp. I am provoking the conversation here intentionally with the notion that we all kind of broaden out what we mean by it, what examples of it stand out for us, and so forth.
Jerry Michalski: And I think the place I'll go to is the superficial end of progress, which is the dramatic ways in which people's lives have been affected. So, our grandparents likely lived through electrification.
Jerry Michalski: And their parents probably lived through a hygiene revolution, and so on and so forth, things that were major. You know, when the outhouse goes away, and you have running water, and it's clean, and you get less sick, and all that, those are really pretty large things. And there may not be…
Jerry Michalski: large changes like that left? I doubt that, sincerely. It may be that AI takes us through the next large change like that, and we're living through it this very instant. That's an interesting proposition.
Jerry Michalski: But yeah, so… so Gil writes in the chat, so progress as transformation of daily life. I think that's one
Jerry Michalski: superficial way of looking at it, but when people ask, where is my flying car, that's kind of what they're asking. It's like, hey, I expected by now that I could, you know, or maybe I could hit a button on my phone like I do for Uber, and a hexacopter would land in my backyard and take me anywhere I want in the city. By now. Well, heck, where is it?
Jerry Michalski: And maybe that's not it. And maybe…
Jerry Michalski: Don't get me started on the word civilization, because if we go back to the dawn of everything and a bunch of other angles here.
Jerry Michalski: You know, technological progress and economic progress tends to be at the cost of
Jerry Michalski: a whole bunch of other things that we may value more, that progress might actually be a relentment on
Jerry Michalski: pushing technology on us that gets us addicted, that this, that, that, that, the other, that progress might, in fact, be something entirely different. So I'm open to anybody who wants to wave that flag in this conversation, because I probably feel stronger about that.
Jerry Michalski: than I do about, where's my flying car, because I don't particularly want urban airscapes, littered with, drones and air taxis and all this other kind of stuff, because
Jerry Michalski: A fender bender at your corner is something that the rest of the city can ignore.
Jerry Michalski: A couple of, you know, quadcopters crashing into each other and dropping into a neighborhood is not something that's easy to ignore.
Jerry Michalski: Like that.
Jerry Michalski: Mr. Nelson.
Mike Nelson: I'm gonna be… Provocative and obnoxious, and say.
Doug Breitbart: Excellent.
Mike Nelson: rewrite this question. I mean, we have already been diverted 10 minutes by talking about what is progress, and that's… I mean, it's just not useful. I mean, all of us have different definitions. I've got at least 5.
Mike Nelson: I would…
Mike Nelson: Actually propose we narrow to something that we might actually be able to talk about for an hour and make some progress on.
Mike Nelson: And that is… Are there more barriers?
Mike Nelson: to technological development.
Mike Nelson: I mean, when I hear the word progress, I can say, okay, well, That's…
Mike Nelson: Are we having more scientific and research discoveries?
Mike Nelson: And then the second part is, are we applying those discoveries in cool, exciting new technologies?
Mike Nelson: And then there's…
Mike Nelson: Are there economic barriers that actually prevent us from using those cool technologies, like the super battery example?
Mike Nelson: And then there's a whole other line of progress, which is, are we building our societies in better ways? And I would say that
Mike Nelson: progress towards a better American democracy.
Mike Nelson: is not gonna happen for the next 3 years. And we can have a whole discussion about
Mike Nelson: Societal progress and evolution of governance systems.
Mike Nelson: But I just… I mean, your question is so broad, wide open, we're gonna all talk past each other. Each of us will make our contribution, and then the next person will say something different, and… because we're all coming from a different place of what progress we think is most important.
Mike Nelson: I mean, we could go straight to the output, right, and say.
Mike Nelson: The improvement in the quality of daily life.
Mike Nelson: That we have seen for the last 200 years.
Mike Nelson: is plateauing or ceasing. I mean, that would be a very provocative thing, and…
Mike Nelson: I would argue against that, if we took a global perspective.
Mike Nelson: I think here in the U.S, the quality of life is not doing very well, partly because we're amusing ourselves to death, and we're all
Mike Nelson: dealing with so many conflicting demands for our time, and… and what I… and what,
Mike Nelson: Dilbert used to call Confusopoly.
Mike Nelson: These companies are throwing so many options at us, and they're… they're constantly trying to confuse
Mike Nelson: what the product is that we're paying for, and how much we pay. I mean, we just don't have time to sort through the crap.
Mike Nelson: And they won't answer the phone when we call them. So that's a whole other thing about customer service, and there's… I think… I think despite the new AI tools, these call centers are…
Mike Nelson: doing a better job of diverting you away from your end goal than getting you there. That's a very niche example of progress.
Mike Nelson: But, there's just too many things that we could talk about with your question, so I would propose a counter question, which is, are there more barriers
Mike Nelson: too technological.
Mike Nelson: improvement.
Mike Nelson: Than in the past.
Mike Nelson: And I would throw two things out, if you haven't seen them.
Mike Nelson: Corey Doctorow's new book, In Shitification.
Mike Nelson: is directly.
Mike Nelson: on this question about why can't we have good things? Why aren't technological breakthroughs leading to customer service breakthroughs and quality of life improvements? And then the other one is a deeper and actually more important book called Breakneck.
Mike Nelson: And the subtitle says it all.
Mike Nelson: How China is engineering our future.
Mike Nelson: And the one-line summary that every book review has mentioned is, China… is a… Society run by engineers.
Mike Nelson: who build things.
Mike Nelson: America has evolved into a… Lawyer… Lawyerly culture that obstructs things.
Mike Nelson: And it, it's… It's coming more true every day.
Mike Nelson: Long screed, I hope that's a helpful suggestion.
Mike Nelson: See where it goes.
Mike Nelson: And thanks for raising a very important issue. I just… I think we need to…
Jerry Michalski: Good. So, I… I…
Jerry Michalski: I empathize with your feeling that the topic was too broad. I think our MO tends to be, I throw a fish on the table, and then we sort of take different stabs and swings at it, and see where it goes, and we end up in something that we generally like and sort of settle into. And I'm unclear that everybody else on the call wants to talk about technological progress.
Jerry Michalski: Which is kind of, kind of why I framed it really broadly.
Jerry Michalski: And by the way, if any of you have followed the Peter Thiel and the Antichrist thread, which I followed last week, to my sort of chagrin, dismay, and great interest.
Jerry Michalski: it's crazy. He's… I think he's saying, and I believe Peter Thiel believes, that anybody who throws a barrier in front of, you know, AGI and superintelligence from these new devices and other kinds of progress is the Antichrist and should be dealt with accordingly, which is a little…
Jerry Michalski: frightening. I will…
Jerry Michalski: We'll post a link to that in my brain. There's a bunch of great articles about that.
Jerry Michalski: Yeah, Confusopoly now has a Wikipedia page, which is nice.
Jerry Michalski: Victoria.
Victoria (Spain): I was thinking… something similar to Mike.
Victoria (Spain): But in another completely different dimension, because…
Victoria (Spain): Progress comes from what we have imagined as a future.
Victoria (Spain): And the French writer Jules Bernet, the author of 80 Days Traveling the World in Balloon, this kind of…
Victoria (Spain): He… Forso, or… He gave us a framework to look forward.
Victoria (Spain): So, who is imagining our futures?
Victoria (Spain): Who are now playing this role of imagining possible outcomes for the future.
Victoria (Spain): Because everything I see nowadays, it's AI, AI, AI, Outspace colonies, immortality.
Victoria (Spain): And maybe the metaverse, or something like that?
Victoria (Spain): And all the narratives are very dark, like Black Mirror.
Victoria (Spain): So, the people imagining our futures are painting them really black.
Victoria (Spain): And maybe it's not only because the governments, the laws in the Americas, laws in Europe.
Victoria (Spain): Because we also have very restrictive laws.
Victoria (Spain): Maybe it's also because we ourselves are Fearing what we have done.
Victoria (Spain): That was my reflection.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you, thank you.
Jerry Michalski: You're so right, so many of the visions that were being given are bleak, or whacked, like the, like Zuckerberg's metaverse.
Jerry Michalski: flavors. It's interesting, you just reminded me that we had a call in 2021 called Our Desirements for a Better Verse. I'll put a link to it in the chat.
Jerry Michalski: where…
Jerry Michalski: I think it came out of someone in this group talking about desirements. I think, was it Scott? It was somebody who sort of coined desirements, which was… seemed like a lovely phrase. And,
Jerry Michalski: we tried to talk about this notion of what… how would we imagine something better? So I actually bought the domain thebetterverse.com, I think? What is it?
Jerry Michalski: There we go.
Jerry Michalski: TheBetaverse.org, which I don't think I've put much on, but I will post it into, into the chat. And that was a lovely conversation, because we were trying to say.
Jerry Michalski: what is a better vision for our future? And I'm sad that Hank Kuna is not on this call. He's based in Amsterdam. He is currently with his wife in Thailand, having a very nice time going around the country.
Jerry Michalski: We're in some time off.
Jerry Michalski: But Hank has spent most of his career helping, ordinary citizens develop, and children, and sort of mixed generations and so forth.
Jerry Michalski: helping them all develop visions of the future and articulate them and share them with each other, which I think is a…
Jerry Michalski: an interesting notion, and its own little ball of complexity. But, thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Pete, please.
Pete Kaminski: Thanks. Thanks, Jerry. It's an interesting, provocative question. Mike, I… I hear your, suggestion, and I actually don't find Jerry's,
Pete Kaminski: Jerry's provocation to be disruptive or distributive or something like that. For me, the point of it is actually to have a messy discussion about
Pete Kaminski: what is progress? Who wants what? You know, how would I define it? How would you define it? How would we define it?
Pete Kaminski: So, so let me talk about what I…
Pete Kaminski: think about progress a little bit. I would say that… that humanity, humans have kind of ebbed and flowed with progress over the past 10,000, 20,000 years. it's nice that I never have to worry about being fed, unless I lose my income and… and then
Pete Kaminski: You know, aren't supported by my weird society that doesn't really want to help people who are less fortunate or something than the rest of us.
Pete Kaminski: And, you know, that's not true 5,000 years ago. It might have been something really, really, difficult to do, making sure that I got enough calories and enough protein and enough water every day.
Pete Kaminski: But on the other hand, I live in a society where we're all very isolated from each other. We have these very small communities, tight-knit communities. The nuclear family thing is…
Pete Kaminski: is dumb. You know, I should be living in a… in a…
Pete Kaminski: you know, in a place where I'm surrounded by 100 people I really love and get along well with, and then that group of us should be surrounded by 100 communities, each about the same size, all kind of living in harmony, et cetera, et cetera, right? So…
Pete Kaminski: you know, depending on… I… so I'm a little bit…
Pete Kaminski: I'm a little bit surprised that we're talking about economic progress, or technological progress, or things like that.
Pete Kaminski: or societal progress. You know, I wouldn't judge that a million-person city is a great advance over a thousand-person village from a thousand years ago, you know? I mean, there's some awesome things about it. You know, museums or…
Pete Kaminski: Whatever, culture stuff. But there's a bunch of bad stuff, too, and… and… And,
Pete Kaminski: on the flip side, another thing I'm surprised about is that we… I think we narrowed down on human progress very quickly. For me, what I care about is things like equity and opportunity agency for all living beings, not just humans.
Pete Kaminski: And minimizing pain and suffering, especially pain and suffering inflicted on one to another. So, we live in a world where we have these things called concentrated animal feeding operations, where
Pete Kaminski: I am aghast that humans can even live on the planet with themselves with, subjugation and torture of other, you know, living beings for their pleasure and benefit, you know? And it's like…
Pete Kaminski: what the heck are we doing? And this is something that, you know, is a modern…
Pete Kaminski: progress, from 100 years ago, or 200 years ago, or 1,000 years ago. And I… I can't even imagine, like, I'm… I'm embarrassed every time I think about it, you know?
Pete Kaminski: oh my god, we think we're having progress over the past couple hundred years, and this is where we have ended up. And that's kind of one, you know, little thing. You know, we have…
Pete Kaminski: a kind of progress and a kind of regression, in the way that we govern ourselves. You know, the… it comes and goes, but right now, I think we're doing a really bad job of
Pete Kaminski: of…
Pete Kaminski: selecting a leadership organization for the United States. And, you know, is that progress where we are with the current administration? I don't think so.
Pete Kaminski: So…
Pete Kaminski: I guess in general, it's, it's interesting. I… I love the question, you know, is, has progress stopped?
Pete Kaminski: I… and… and kind of in answer, I think there's progress and regression in lots of different ways. And… and I think… I wish people… I wish humans paid more attention to non-humans, and progress for them as well.
Pete Kaminski: Thanks.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you very much.
Jerry Michalski: Hey Scott, our topic today is, has progress stopped?
Jerry Michalski: And, we're going around on that in different kinds of ways.
Scott Moehring: Are we going around, or are we raising hands? I don't want to jump in.
Jerry Michalski: We've been raising hands, and there's a gap in the hand raise just now, which is why I said hi to you.
Jerry Michalski: and, so we've been,
Jerry Michalski: Putting a whole bunch of things, and part of it is, like, we're trying to adjust the lens and figure out, like, how big is the aperture of what we want to talk about, and what are we going to focus on, and so forth.
Scott Moehring: I have a perspective on it, which is why I jumped in. I was hoping this would be the subject.
Jerry Michalski: That sounds great, and we would love to hear your perspective.
Scott Moehring: Excellent. So, a couple years ago, I did a deep dive into my family history, and found out that we are actually
Scott Moehring: bicycle barons in the U.S, so to speak.
Jerry Michalski: No way, from Dayton, or from where?
Scott Moehring: From Shelby, Ohio.
Jerry Michalski: Ohio? Had to be Ohio.
Scott Moehring: It had to be Ohio.
Jerry Michalski: Don't know why. Why Ohio?
Scott Moehring: My… I used to work in the retail industry in Ohio, and it was a 10-hour drive to
Scott Moehring: Well, I think it was 80% of the country.
Scott Moehring: Population-wise?
Jerry Michalski: Erie… the Erie Canal, I think, helped with… yeah.
Scott Moehring: But it's like, it's nowhere, but it's… you can get to everywhere. So that's kind of what it was. So as a result, I found out that… that I ended up doing a design for a bicycle museum.
Scott Moehring: And I made a timeline that was 27 feet long. It's still hanging up in the police…
Scott Moehring: department. They had a little space where they could hang this, and they said, we're gonna take this space and turn it into
Scott Moehring: This used to be… the building used to be the bicycle factory. So, this was a place that in the early…
Scott Moehring: 1900s was running 3 shifts.
Scott Moehring: When the country was going through the… The crash.
Scott Moehring: the Great Depression.
Scott Moehring: They were running 24 hours a day and building housing for people, and so they could move to Shelby, Ohio.
Scott Moehring: So, what I found out as making this, timeline, was that there was a period… I'm looking at my notes here…
Scott Moehring: between 1876 and 1903 in the U.S, so that's 27 years.
Scott Moehring: Where we made these 8 things. These 8 things appeared.
Scott Moehring: The telephone?
Scott Moehring: The internal combustion engine, The light bulb.
Scott Moehring: the power plant, The electrical power plant, the modern bicycle, the radio, the airplane, and the automobile.
Scott Moehring: And I was astonished that in this
Scott Moehring: short time period, all of these things appeared.
Scott Moehring: And what life was like before that, and what life… Has been, like, since that.
Scott Moehring: And, you know, we're always talking about change now, which is, you know, related to progress, right?
Scott Moehring: And I thought.
Scott Moehring: The world would be unrecognizable if all of the… when all those things show up all of a sudden.
Scott Moehring: And what I realized is that for the most thing, most part, most of the things we have now that we would call progress are just an iteration on
Scott Moehring: What we have already.
Scott Moehring: Yes, there are some new things, but most of them, I think, are just iterations, and…
Scott Moehring: I have a picture of me riding a 110-year-old bicycle that I did a couple of months ago.
Scott Moehring: And it looks…
Scott Moehring: Looks like a bicycle. Like, yes, you can say, oh, it's different, but you really have to look at the details to say it's different. You're gonna say, oh, it's a bicycle.
Scott Moehring: My phone is a phone. Yeah, I can carry it in my hand.
Scott Moehring: But… Cell phone.
Scott Moehring: And I'm wondering if, on the subject of progress stalling, If satisficing comes into it.
Scott Moehring: Satisficing is that term where you're reaching… you reach an adequate result rather than an ideal one.
Scott Moehring: And then you just… Accept it and move on.
Scott Moehring: And I would… Make the argument that That's what we do.
Scott Moehring: for things that, you know, ideal is a… I mean, I'm sorry, adequate is kind of a broad thing, and…
Scott Moehring: Maybe some of these things that are broken are also… In some perspectives, adequate.
Scott Moehring: We're adequate enough That they just kind of keep…
Scott Moehring: Keep going, because… yeah, we can iterate on them, but… But…
Scott Moehring: they're… they're fine. They somehow satisfy us. Good enough, yes. Exactly. Which I find to be a healthy mindset for many things, but it also can be a stagnating one.
Scott Moehring: for other things. So, that's my thought.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you, Scott.
Jerry Michalski: You've provoked a whole bunch of interesting things happening in the chat as well, which is great. Doug, please.
Doug Breitbart: Yeah, I… I… Scott, I love that. And… and… I wonder whether…
Doug Breitbart: One man's progress is another man's destruction.
Doug Breitbart: That, it's actually in the failure breakdown…
Doug Breitbart: No longer fit for purpose or use.
Doug Breitbart: Of major societal and cultural features and institutions.
Doug Breitbart: That progress lies.
Doug Breitbart: That in their inability to meet needs, in their inability to Actually serve and support Manifest experiential Progress.
Doug Breitbart: In quality of people's lives, in emotional experience of their living them.
Doug Breitbart: that, out of… out of those breakdowns, and out of that.
Doug Breitbart: System collapse, sprouts what's needed and what's new that constitutes progress.
Doug Breitbart: And I'm complete with that.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, son.
Jerry Michalski: I think that the whole,
Jerry Michalski: Whole question about who's… who sets…
Jerry Michalski: Who delivers our visions of the future is super interesting, and sci-fi, we've had, in the chat, we've had a lot of conversation about sci-fi authors and sci-fi visions.
Jerry Michalski: Victoria mentioned Ted Chang, who has really interesting opinions on this. There are many others.
Jerry Michalski: Mike mentioned David Brinn.
Jerry Michalski: That would make it its own good topic, which would be, like, a sharing of who our favorite science fiction
Jerry Michalski: vision writers are. Unfortunately, too many science fiction writers are writing dystopian futures, and not enough are writing more utopian futures. I wish I'd read more Ursula Le Guin.
Jerry Michalski: Because she was very much describing worlds in which gender happens differently, and other kinds of things happen, and she was really trying to explore, I think, more positive futures, so…
Jerry Michalski: That would be an interesting…
Mike Nelson: That trend is changing. That trend is changing.
Jerry Michalski: The dystopian is shifting?
Mike Nelson: Oh yeah, yeah, I mean, just the last 10 years. I mean, for a while there, that's all you got.
Mike Nelson: But, no, that is… there's a concerted effort, and, there's clearly a market.
Mike Nelson: for envisioning better worlds, and we could… I mean, I know David Bryn very well, I'm sure you do. There's also the UC San…
Mike Nelson: Ghost Center that,
Jerry Michalski: Vertiv?
Mike Nelson: Yep. Well, no, no, he was involved in it, but there's a Clarion Writer's Workshop, and some of the people there are also…
Mike Nelson: Helping influence this.
Mike Nelson: I'd love to have a topic on this, because I think how literature impacts our vision of the future is very important.
Jerry Michalski: That sounds great. Good idea, thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Dave?
David Witzel: Well, and I was just tossing in the, I stuck in a few links to some of the Tyler Cohen stuff from a year or so ago, where they're talking about kind of a science of progress, and so they're, you know, it seems to be… it bubbled up a little while back, but I was struck… I've been struck a couple of times by, like, how recent some of these ideas are that we have humanity as an objective of progress.
David Witzel: And the notion that we can contribute to progress, and so I kind of accidentally stumbled across this field of miliorism, which
David Witzel: you know, I guess I've probably read a little bit of James and stuff, but it's from, like, the late 1800s, where the notion… Western philosophy was grappling with whether humanity was supposed to help improve the world or something.
David Witzel: You know? And it's like, 150 years, give or take, kind of, you know? And so before we had this notion of progress, I think it was like, hey, life's good, we're living a life, you know? Look, life!
David Witzel: And that would be a very different, you know, kind of mandate than, you know, like a striving towards something undetermined. So, I just thought it was funny that, you know, I feel like we very much internalized the notion that we were supposed to create progress.
David Witzel: But, you know, what if you didn't?
Jerry Michalski: Which is parallel to the sort of growth mandate that capitalism puts us under, which is everything must grow and get bigger, and, you know, everybody aspires to be the next Facebook, or what have you, you know, or NVIDIA these days, I guess.
David Witzel: Well, and that's part of what I think, you know, drives me nuts about, like, the Tyler Cohn stuff is because… and it is a very mechanical mindset, as opposed to what Pete's talking about, and often, you know, growth means let's make it more efficient, you know, so we're, you know, we're just kind of squeeze the last, you know, bit of blood out of that cow on the I-5, so…
Jerry Michalski: Oh, man.
Jerry Michalski: Stacy, were you jumping in?
Stacey Druss: No, I'm sorry, did I make noise?
Jerry Michalski: You lit up the microphone, so I was like, oh…
Jerry Michalski: Sorry. Let me… no worries, let me go to Alex.
Alex Kladitis: Thanks, David, that, that was, that was it, that was good.
Alex Kladitis: just to go back to what Scott got me thinking, and then Doug as well, that…
Alex Kladitis: If you take as an example, and I'm gonna talk about this, I have… I'm really not intellectually invested in this or understanding, but I will say, for example, in economics.
Alex Kladitis: The way central banks run the world's economic system, or their own central bank, and then by default, other ones, is they aim for 2% growth.
Alex Kladitis: Now, that is quite interesting, because why not zero growth? Because then things don't get more expensive. Why not 10%? They're kind of trying to maximize and minimize all sorts of competing
Alex Kladitis: theories, even assuming that the theories work, but that's what the thing. So it just strikes me that
Alex Kladitis: And Scott sort of got me thinking about that, says.
Alex Kladitis: There's a controlled… there's partly a mechanistic
Alex Kladitis: profit-driven, controlled iteration. So if you've got a million subscribers that pay for your service.
Alex Kladitis: And you find a new way of doing the same thing, which means you lose half a million of them.
Alex Kladitis: Will you actually put that into effect?
Alex Kladitis: And the theory goes that, well, if it's competition, then someone else will, or whatever. But I think we're getting big enough now where that isn't necessarily playing out anymore, it's sort of…
Alex Kladitis: there's a lot more directive, and I think other people have mentioned that, there's a lot more directive
Alex Kladitis: Control over how we progress.
Alex Kladitis: than there was… there was ever before. Who was it that said that in China they do it one way, and here we do it by lawyers, or whatever, the West do it by lawyers? I think it was, Mike.
Mike Nelson: Yeah, that was… I was quoting this new book called Breakneck.
Alex Kladitis: Yeah, so, so I do think it's a feature now of the system that
Alex Kladitis: it's… I cannot say… blame anyone or point to anyone. I say this system has iterated to be a controlled growth system.
Alex Kladitis: Rather than a… Whoever, you know, We're suddenly… everybody's…
Alex Kladitis: as much food as they want, as much whatever as they want. I don't think the system would allow that in today's
Alex Kladitis: Rules, societal, economic, and everything, rules.
Alex Kladitis: But I'm way beyond my expertise now, so that's my gut feel.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you for swimming out into the deeper waters.
Jerry Michalski: And it's interesting that we've spent very little, not zero, but very little time talking about social progress, and things like gay marriage, and the things that there's major backlash against right now.
Jerry Michalski: for me.
Jerry Michalski: you know, a better world among humans is definitely a kind of progress I would rather have than faster flights.
Jerry Michalski: For sure. Now, greener energy that doesn't destroy the planet, I'm on… I'm on that… I'm on board that train, too.
Jerry Michalski: To mix metaphors, maybe.
Jerry Michalski: But… but…
Jerry Michalski: How we can't manage to get rid of wars, how we manage to still otherize people and successfully pump the public into a frenzy about those other people, and then run the table on policies.
Jerry Michalski: that aren't friendly to humans, I… I don't… I don't think that's progress at all. I think we're moving
Jerry Michalski: moving backwards pretty quickly right now on those things, and I would love to know what progress looks like there. Gil?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Well, it just complicated things for me, Jerry, thank you.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Oh, excellent. That's my job.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Well, so there's several things here, but pro-
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So I agree with you about things like gay marriage, but other people don't. So is that progress or not? That's very subjective, subject to the culture and subcultures and so… and belief systems that you live in. So there's that level of things. There's not, you know, are we looking for universal definitions of progress, or progress as we and our cohort see it? That's sort of one.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: On wars,
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Well, on the one hand, there hasn't been a major war in Europe for, what, 70 years, until recently, after, you know, in Europe with a history of hundreds upon hundreds upon hundreds of years.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: of warfare.
Jerry Michalski: It's… if you look back on Europe's history with wars, it's just nasty.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah.
Jerry Michalski: There's the Hundred Years' War, the Thirty Years' War, the Six Year's War, and everybody's going after everybody
Jerry Michalski: So often, it's crazy.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Well, that's my point. That was crazy, and then post-World War II, there was 70-some-odd years of no war in Europe, until Putin and his gang, you know, started to…
Victoria (Spain): Let's have a problem.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: kick shit up, so there's, you know, so there's that.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Huh?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Victoria's mic was making some noise, I just… Right. You know, so there's a question in that of what is the trajectory or timeframe that we're looking at, and, you know, and the historical cycles and the long trends. Yep. And, you know, we tend to pay attention to our own lifetimes here.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: It's particularly disturbing now, because my lifetime has been mostly, until recently, a history of what I would consider progress, social progress.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: But…
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: you know, clearly backsliding now. So there's that whole dimension, but I wanted to respond to Alex about growth.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Or to whoever about growth.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Because clearly, you know, we now live in a system that privileges growth.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: You know, if I'm a corporation, my profits grew, you know, revenues grew 5% last year, and somebody else's grew 5.2% last year, I'm in the shithouse. So there's that game.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: On the other hand, degrowth denies the biological reality of every organism is designed to feed and reproduce and propagate, so there's a natural growth in living systems, but it's constrained.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: By resources, competition, and so forth. It's not infinite. Living systems have a quality called satiation, which human capitalist economic systems seem not to.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: You know, a lion goes out to hunt and brings down a wildebeest and drags it back to the pride, and everybody eats, and what do they do next? They don't go out and get another one, they go to sleep.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Because they've eaten enough, and we don't have enough here.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: But, you know, so the notion of
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: David, was it you who said that progress is this relatively recent or specialized concept? Progress was not always a drive in human history.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: There was care.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And there was a growth of a certain kind within resource constraints, but progress as a goal.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Maybe wasn't there.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And so that comes in, you know, does that come in with capitalism? Does that come in with technology? Where… does that come in with certain religions? the notion of betterment in the context of care, you know, I'm gonna build a better house, take better care of my family.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: There's that. There's progress as accumulation of wealth and power, which maybe is a different thing.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And I don't know where else to go with that, but there's a whole territory to explore there.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And takes me back… takes me back to Victoria and my question at the top of the call, which is, what do we mean by this, anyway?
Jerry Michalski: Love that. And that conversation about what do we mean by this and why.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: is, I think, a more illuminating and provocative question than trying to determine… put a score on whether there's been progress or not, because it reveals what we are each caring about.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I'm complete.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks. So what do we care about?
Jerry Michalski: What does matter?
Scott Moehring: Well, I… I don't know why this pops into my head, but sometimes when I'm…
Scott Moehring: wanting to feel grateful, I realized that I… being naked in a jungle.
Scott Moehring: I would probably be worse off.
Scott Moehring: Just, maybe not for the next 15 minutes, but for the next year.
Scott Moehring: If I survived.
Scott Moehring: And… So… what is progress? Is it how many people are… not… Naked in a jungle?
Scott Moehring: I don't know if that… is an adequate definition, but I think it's the start.
Scott Moehring: Of a definition, perhaps, that… There are so many things that we have that are…
Scott Moehring: Go back 200 years, did not have.
Scott Moehring: Go back 500 years, did not have.
Scott Moehring: And… Hopefully, we find ourselves Not reversing that.
Scott Moehring: And finding that our… Offspring are worse off, and closer to the jungle.
Scott Moehring: That's an unformed thought, but I'm… offering.
Jerry Michalski: There's a… Gil, go ahead.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I just wanted to say what I put in the chat, Scott. What's wrong with Naked in the Jungle?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Naked in the Jungle has worked very well for lots of humans for a very, very long time.
Scott Moehring: And none of us would be alive at this age. Probably.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: It's not clear. From the archival evidence, not clear.
Scott Moehring: It's unclear. I would say unclear is not a rousing… Argument for, let's all…
Scott Moehring: Go back to the jungle.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: No, no, no, I'm not saying let's all go back to the jungle, I'm saying that the common meme of people naked in the jungle as an indication of a bygone age that was much more terrible than that is we don't know that.
Scott Moehring: Okay.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: That's the, you know, that's the argument that Wengro and Grapeut weighed into early in Dawn of Everything about these two visions of human society.
Scott Moehring: And if we don't know that it's… and we don't… if we don't know that it's worse, we also don't know it was better.
Scott Moehring: So, really, the don't know.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah.
Scott Moehring: I think.
Mike Nelson: I think that archaeological data is becoming more and more clear, and the… percentage of…
Mike Nelson: Males of breeding age who died of violent means in almost every ancient society.
Mike Nelson: Wasn't, you know.
Mike Nelson: 40% greater. It was 400% greater, or 1,000% greater. I put a note in here on that. Clearly, when things are more disrupted, either because
Mike Nelson: You now have hunter-gatherers at war with the agricultural societies, which was about 8,000 years ago. Then you had an explosion of violence.
Mike Nelson: But the data I've seen is pretty concrete.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Graeber and Wengro argue that that those phenomena were highly localized and variable, dependent on the society and culture.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Not on… not on the ear.
Mike Nelson: I mean, the data shows that when there is disruption, whether climatic or changes in the organization of society.
Mike Nelson: Much more violence, but…
Mike Nelson: There's no evidence for a golden age where everybody holds hands and gets along, and my tribe of 300 people don't interact with your tribe, and we all are just very happy.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: No, no, no, and that's not what they're saying. They're saying that you will find situations where in the same region, you'll find some tribes that are peaceful and some tribes that are warlike, and not interacting with each other. I mean, I don't know the details of this, but part of their argument is a much more variable tapestry of human history than what we tend to assume.
Mike Nelson: Oh, yeah.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Not like it evolves in a unified way over time, but it's very noisy.
Mike Nelson: We are agree… we are agreeing vehemently. Yeah. You do the average.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yep.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And I'm saying, let's not do the average, let's look at the variation, because their argument, I think, is that if there's that variation, then there's the possibility of different phenomena arising, more or less, and what are the circumstances for that, and how do you nurture that?
Mike Nelson: Well, again, for a green… for a green…
Jerry Michalski: Violently. I'm going to.
Mike Nelson: Our hope is not violent.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah, we'll stop.
Jerry Michalski: I'm gonna thank Alex for his patience and go back to, the normal order of things.
Alex Kladitis: Stacy, do you want to contribute to that? Because I'm just going to move it slightly off.
Stacey Druss: just one statement, and it's just to be provocative. I just want to point out that this idea about, like, life and living is sort of cultural in nature. There are some… I know it's weird, but I actually have met people that
Stacey Druss: When their loved ones pass, they don't even grieve the way we do, because
Stacey Druss: their idea of death is very different. So, I just want to point that out, because we all seem to think, like, you know, living in… at all costs, like, that is the be-all and end-all.
Stacey Druss: But if you really believe that this is just one page in the book, and you're going on to the next page, the thinking shifts. I just wanted to…
Stacey Druss: Throw that out there.
Jerry Michalski: Yeah, thank you. It's all our frame of reference. Back to Alex.
Alex Kladitis: was good.
Alex Kladitis: That frame, what you just discussed, and it's a great discussion, right?
Alex Kladitis: Is historical progress, so we're comparing with times past.
Alex Kladitis: But we're in the now, and we're… one way of thinking, one aspect of this question is.
Alex Kladitis: Do I feel like there's progress?
Alex Kladitis: I'm in the moment, Therefore, my feeling of progress might not be as…
Alex Kladitis: I might not feel as much progress. Maybe progress is happening.
Alex Kladitis: If we stand back, and… well, maybe in 20 years, when we look back, we'll say, oh, that happened, that happened, that's progress.
Alex Kladitis: But right now, we're living in it, and… We naturally don't feel Or, we demand more.
Alex Kladitis: I want flying cars. You know, I want a flying car out there. Sorry, you know, I'd just love to have one for the hell of it. And I want suddenly to, I don't know.
Alex Kladitis: world's greatest battery to be invented, you know, I want this progress. I want cancer to be cured. Boom, just like that.
Alex Kladitis: But it takes time.
Alex Kladitis: So…
Alex Kladitis: Historical is one aspect, but what you feel is another aspect, and you're too close to the leading edge to feel it, perhaps.
Alex Kladitis: And if someone comes up and says, Alex, you're wrong, and I'm feeling it, that's fine. I'm okay with that.
Jerry Michalski: Somebody should do that just to do it, I mean, really.
Jerry Michalski: Kidding?
Jerry Michalski: So… Do we want to change our notions of progress? Are we… Is… is progress overheated? Doug?
Doug Breitbart: So, so, yeah.
Doug Breitbart: I, I would, offer… Progress as…
Doug Breitbart: An evolutionary maturation of our species, such that…
Doug Breitbart: We managed to remember, reconnect with…
Doug Breitbart: The larger whole and the more transcendent idea of beyond my survival and self-interest.
Doug Breitbart: What's in service to the whole?
Doug Breitbart: And, that… that on a… on a vitality, in alignment with natural law, in alignment with biome, in alignment with what's in service to life, what's in service to survival.
Doug Breitbart: That it's all of us or none of us would be progress. And I… and I actually…
Doug Breitbart: Just to sort of double down on that… Would… You know, suggests that…
Doug Breitbart: That is an emergent… it's been an emergent phenomena at different periods of… Transformation, transition, disruption.
Doug Breitbart: Those ideas percolate through.
Doug Breitbart: And they tend to be, you know, delivered by a persona.
Doug Breitbart: And they tend to generate global ripples and influences and effects.
Doug Breitbart: And I think part of…
Doug Breitbart: Part of what might be missing today from
Doug Breitbart: The next, sort of, guiding light and or pointer indicator toward transitioning out of the dystopic.
Doug Breitbart: Chaos that we're in in the moment.
Doug Breitbart: Is that right now, that global persona is missing. Like, I don't know that we have a bunch of those.
Doug Breitbart: But they tend to come out of these periods.
Doug Breitbart: Like, they emerge… they percolate out of them.
Jerry Michalski: Modern axial age kind of thing?
Doug Breitbart: Yeah, and the messengers, or the channelers, or the bearers of light, you know.
Doug Breitbart: I think will… will surface and appear. Right now, we're in this period of… The absence of.
Doug Breitbart: And for lack thereof, everybody's, like, in chaos.
Jerry Michalski: Victoria, if you want to jump in, you're saying something along these lines in the chat.
Jerry Michalski: I'm curious what your thoughts are.
Jerry Michalski: Victoria, did you hear me?
Stacey Druss: Yeah, but you… she's muted. Do you have to unmute her since.
Victoria (Spain): No, no, sure.
Jerry Michalski: He's unmuting.
Victoria (Spain): I said that progress for the sake of progress seems like
Victoria (Spain): A vain goal, or a stupid goal, because you need to know what you are progressing toward.
Victoria (Spain): and then Jerry asks, if, progress was our new god, and I said, no, progress is the god.
Victoria (Spain): that made the illustration the Enlightenment, sorry, the Enlightenment. Now.
Victoria (Spain): We are a very varied people. We are not homogeneous. You Americans think one way, and I say you Americans because I see you from Europe, but you think different from your neighbor, and…
Victoria (Spain): So…
Victoria (Spain): Some are thinking that the Church of the Flying Spaghetti saucer, and the others are thinking about economic,
Victoria (Spain): Sharks, and the others are thinking, going to meditate and feel…
Victoria (Spain): So, it's to their priorities. We are not, Borgs. I don't know if you remember Star Trek and the Borgs?
Victoria (Spain): Though.
Jerry Michalski: Right.
Victoria (Spain): were the buddies who were… They integrated everything, but they were, like, a single organism.
Victoria (Spain): They didn't have individualism.
Victoria (Spain): We… we do.
Victoria (Spain): We need to find a balance between the individual, the individual, and the society, but we have individualism. We are not works.
Jerry Michalski: And, and…
Jerry Michalski: Is there a… is there a religion that does that? I mean, FSM, the Flying Spaghetti Monster, is a… it's also known as Pastafarianism, which I… a term I adore.
Jerry Michalski: is posed as a fun religion, as a tongue-in-cheek religion, and I own the domain fubarism.com, which is exactly inspired by the Flying Spaghetti Monster and things like that, but it's meant to be a serious question if you got to invent your own…
Victoria (Spain): belong to the Judaism, is it youth?
Victoria (Spain): And this is the church of the Judahism. Take it easy.
Jerry Michalski: Awesome!
Victoria (Spain): There are…
Jerry Michalski: Who knew that the… who knew that the big Lebowski was gonna make it into this call?
Jerry Michalski: Pete, please.
Pete Kaminski: I think I wanted to pick up, kind of.
Pete Kaminski: where Doug, Doug B. was.
Pete Kaminski: And it made me think… I like what you said, Doug. And I wanted to play contrarian for a sec, not because I think it's a good thing, but because we live with this contrarian thing.
Pete Kaminski: We have, demonstrably billionaires whose idea… one billionaire's idea of progress is, life sentience will become multi-planetary.
Pete Kaminski: And that's pretty much the only thing he cares about, really. I mean, he cares about lots of chaos and fun and hooliganism.
Pete Kaminski: But he's been steady on his goal of, life must become, multi-planetary, you know, down the torpedoes, I don't care who dies, or who hates it, or what, we're just gonna do it.
Pete Kaminski: We have another billionaire, running the country, running the country, whose… his progress for him has been dominance. I can make whatever decision I want, I can say whatever I want, I can…
Pete Kaminski: deploy the U.S. military however I want. I can invade whatever I want, in-country or out of country. I can kill whoever I want. I can destroy whatever building I want, and I can build whatever building I want.
Pete Kaminski: That's progress for him. So… and…
Pete Kaminski: to get to the point where those people could make those kinds of decisions, society-wide decisions. We had, you know, a few hundred, you know, several centuries of moving up the ladder of…
Pete Kaminski: the golden rule. The people with the most gold get to make the rules. And, you know, so we've gotten to the point where
Pete Kaminski: we have progress. A few people make, dramatically Life-altering decisions for…
Pete Kaminski: Billions of people on the rest of the planet. And they make the… they make them more or less unilaterally.
Pete Kaminski: So…
Pete Kaminski: so at least for some people, you know, we can talk about, well, I wish we could raise the tide for everybody. For a few people.
Pete Kaminski: they're thinking.
Pete Kaminski: what I care about is that a few people, especially me, are going to be the highest we can get. I can make the most decisions affecting the most number of people, and have the most resources available to me, and I don't care what happens to the rest of the distribution of the population. I really don't. So, just a reflection that,
Pete Kaminski: the… progress.
Pete Kaminski: Progress is different for different people, and some of us, it's very different.
Pete Kaminski: In a way that harms everybody else.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you, Pete.
Jerry Michalski: Mike, do you want to tell us about How Progress Ends, the book you just pasted the long link into the chat about?
Mike Nelson: I've only read the book reviews, so… and it was a biased book review.
Mike Nelson: So… but I… it's very related.
Mike Nelson: There's… there have been a couple of very good, sort of.
Mike Nelson: libertarian texts on the barriers to progress, not just the one about China, but also a couple other… Reason magazine has done a series of articles on
Mike Nelson: on why we're getting in our way, and why we have to have social progress, as well as technology breakthrough. I mean, what I've heard from this talk today is reaffirming my statement at the top, which is, I think everybody's agreeing that technology continues to progress.
Mike Nelson: different in different places, and that a lot of the focus has been on social progress, and why… and the lack of social progress is…
Mike Nelson: Has… has held back.
Mike Nelson: So many people from enjoying the benefits.
Mike Nelson: I don't know if anybody saw the Washington… the Wall Street Journal today.
Mike Nelson: But I was almost moved to tears. It was an article about corruption in South Africa.
Mike Nelson: South Africa has now become the most economically unequal country in the world.
Mike Nelson: Which is really quite a feat.
Mike Nelson: And basically, the ruling party
Mike Nelson: In the name of spreading the wealth and, you know, destroying the apartheid system has just… Given.
Mike Nelson: Most of the…
Mike Nelson: economic activity of the country to a handful of very well-connected people in the… in the, African National Committee. I mean, it's just the ANC…
Mike Nelson: It's just a corruption machine. And again.
Mike Nelson: they have progress in South Africa. They certainly have a lot more information technology and great apps, and…
Mike Nelson: People are getting educated better.
Mike Nelson: But it isn't showing up in the daily lives of most of the people.
Mike Nelson: So, you know, maybe… maybe in the future we can… we can actually ask that question, and I, I, I'm particularly…
Mike Nelson: Concerned about corruption just eating our society.
Mike Nelson: Not just in the US, but in South Africa. It did in Russia long ago.
Mike Nelson: And I don't know, I mean, to be positive, maybe we, you know, have a discussion about the few places where people have done something to
Mike Nelson: To push back against corruption, or to build the guardrails.
Mike Nelson: But even in… even in the Nordic countries, which have always been very transparent and very good about fighting corruption, there is…
Mike Nelson: There's a modern bandit class that seems to be showing up, and…
Mike Nelson: Using the power structure to get more.
Jerry Michalski: Right.
Alex Kladitis: Can I come in on this. Sorry, Jerry.
Jerry Michalski: Go ahead, Alex.
Alex Kladitis: Mike?
Alex Kladitis: I am shocked to hear you say those words that you just said. They're great. I believe them, but I considered myself to be a…
Alex Kladitis: A conspiracy theorist to have these thoughts, honestly.
Alex Kladitis: I'm shocked that you just said that. I literally have spent my life, or not my life, the last few years, saying to people, wake up, you know, there's something wrong with the way that the system is.
Alex Kladitis: And, you know, I'll call it, what is it?
Alex Kladitis: crony capitalism, but, you know, it's…
Alex Kladitis: I'm, I'm… I'm impressed. I'm really pleased that we said that.
Mike Nelson: Yeah, well, we should, as I say, I think… how to defeat crony capitalism.
Mike Nelson: Would be a very interesting topic, because it would get us focused on what's going on, and get us…
Mike Nelson: Rather than saying, how do we reinvent capitalism?
Mike Nelson: Just focus on that one piece of the puzzle.
Jerry Michalski: I love that question. I think it's a… it's a great question.
Jerry Michalski: One of the reasons that I've had
Jerry Michalski: a couple of side calls and a couple of topics around, governance, like what works in governance, for example, and then I have a thing I call the next two stacks. What are our new stacks?
Jerry Michalski: is that centralization tends to corrupt, absolute centralization corrupts absolutely, to paraphrase Lord Acton.
Jerry Michalski: And, you know.
Jerry Michalski: in Russia, a peasant from the Republic of Georgia can take over the whole thing because they've designed a pyramid that has complete authority at the top without any checks, and then you have, like, a whole bunch of bad stuff happens, and everywhere we see
Jerry Michalski: those kinds of structures arise, they tend to not play out very well, so I was hunting for
Jerry Michalski: and am still very much hunting for. What is the new stack of things that communities, large and small, can choose from and adopt voluntarily that would do things like increase prosperity, raise the sustainability of their biosphere or their watershed.
Jerry Michalski: Help them conquer corruption.
Jerry Michalski: And defeat… expose and defeat corruption. Make them… one of the problems with…
Jerry Michalski: pacifist societies living next to warring societies is that the warring societies tend to have better weapons and less morality, so they come tromping in. And this is the story of human history writ large, unfortunately.
Jerry Michalski: is that all too often, the people who see something nice happening next door just go in and take it. And so how do you make it very… how do you turn communities into porcupines.
Mike Nelson: Or pufferfish.
Jerry Michalski: So that, when someone tries to ingest them, they have to barf them back out. I'm really interested in Taiwan. How might Taiwan turn itself into a pufferfish?
Jerry Michalski: Ukraine kind of is, but it's not really working. I mean, it's pretty clear to me that most Ukrainians would absolutely hate and undermine a regime under Putin to their dying breath, that it is such a poison, such a poisoned relationship that they would, you know, stand up.
Jerry Michalski: But, but how do we do the opposite? How do we create…
Jerry Michalski: Or how do we compose or make available a bunch of things that actually make for a better life?
Jerry Michalski: And bake into them, some set of things, and I don't know if that means
Jerry Michalski: some kind of verifiable identity on the blockchain? I don't… I don't know, that's beyond my pay grade. I don't know if that means other kinds of things, but I'm extremely interested in that.
Jerry Michalski: I think that we're… and the lack
Jerry Michalski: of a stack like that means that when the Arab Spring happens, and all of North Africa basically overturns their governments a couple decades later, they are no better off.
Jerry Michalski: Because nobody had a thing they could reach for that would stop
Jerry Michalski: The corruption from taking over, the powers that be from before, from coming back and just…
Jerry Michalski: Adopting new clothing, but still running the country, all those kinds of things.
Jerry Michalski: So, it's a little depressing to look at how human history has failed to progress in those ways, but I think it's very possible, but it needs to be done in some much more distributed, decentralized way.
Jerry Michalski: I look to the, you know, Fetiverse and IndieWeb and decentralization on the net as maybe examples, but I'm not sure.
Jerry Michalski: The crypto world doesn't feel to me like the answer. So for me, a part of the betterverse involves
Jerry Michalski: evolving these kinds of stacks and having serious conversations to make these things better and better over time. Sorry, Mike, go ahead.
Mike Nelson: Because of this discussion, I just discovered that there is a museum of political corruption.
Jerry Michalski: Oh, nice!
Mike Nelson: Yeah, I don't know if it's real, I don't know if it's a physical place, it could just be a virtual museum.
Mike Nelson: But they do have halls of shame and halls of honor.
Mike Nelson: Pretty cool. I put the link.
Alex Kladitis: Good night.
Alex Kladitis: That's great, thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you.
Alex Kladitis: without any actual proof, because… but my uncle has passed now, like, 50 years ago, when we used to talk politics and corruption, because I was in Africa, so it was all corruption, whatever.
Alex Kladitis: I lived there. He used to say, but Alex, you have to grow your thinking.
Alex Kladitis: He said, the difference between Africa and we used to live in Greece, and here is corruption happens here.
Alex Kladitis: It's just more sophisticated.
Alex Kladitis: And as you go, say, to the British, they're even more sophisticated. You don't see it, but corruption is endemic across all societies. So I wonder… I wonder how people feel about that.
Alex Kladitis: Because that's my feeling, is there's a lot of corruption everywhere, it's just…
Alex Kladitis: Transparent here, not so transparent, you know, a bit obtuse or opaque over there.
Mike Nelson: It all depends on how much shame there is.
Mike Nelson: And I know one reason Nigeria has been a… Epicenter for online scamming.
Mike Nelson: is because… When it first started happening.
Mike Nelson: there was a celebration of these scams. The scammers were almost national heroes.
Mike Nelson: one of the first things that happened in this regard wasn't on the internet, because the internet wasn't really there.
Mike Nelson: there were some guys sending faxes to the World Bank.
Mike Nelson: And they were… they were… they were offering these special deals. Oh my god, I just need a million dollars, and then we can unlock all this money, and we can give you the finder's fee, and it was exactly the same thing that's going on 25, 30 years later.
Mike Nelson: But there was a sense of, you know, the Robin Hood. You know, let's take money from these rich countries and, you know, we'll spend it here. And that's why there's 100,000 people in Nigeria in the online scamming business.
Jerry Michalski: I think it's a little bit like, the narco trafficantes in Mexico, because there are narco ridas, or something like that. There's basically a genre of Norteno music.
Mike Nelson: that celebrates.
Jerry Michalski: that celebrates the nautical cartels, because they are an economic success of some sort.
Mike Nelson: And it's bringing money back into the community. I mean, it's… there are indirect benefits to the average person in the street if they're not caught in the middle of the crossfire.
Alex Kladitis: Can I ask this question? Because we shouldn't discuss this, because it's a different topic, but on the issue of Nigeria being scam capital for that reason, which is good.
Alex Kladitis: In the 90s, I remember Canada was also
Alex Kladitis: a big source of scamming schemes to do with shares, owning shares and whatever. And I don't know, that's… but the mechanics must be totally different there. And why Canada? And since then, they actually tried to lock it, you know, get rid of it or whatever.
Alex Kladitis: So I don't know if there's any… anything more in Canada versus anywhere else in the world, but it just fascinates me that it hopped across.
Mike Nelson: Well, one… one reason, and I'm sorry, Doug, it's your turn, but one…
Alex Kladitis: Sorry, Doug.
Mike Nelson: I think the reason that Canada and the Caribbean are hotbeds of phone scams is that they share the same country code with us.
Mike Nelson: So they're also, you know, country code 1.
Mike Nelson: And so these little countries, little islands, look like a local call.
Mike Nelson: from another.
Jerry Michalski: So we have the North American Numbering Plan to blame for this?
Mike Nelson: Yeah, it's… I'm not picking this up. This is… this is…
Jerry Michalski: Lord!
Mike Nelson: Yeah.
Jerry Michalski: You sound like Dave Berry. I am not making this up.
Mike Nelson: Love it.
Jerry Michalski: of Dave Berry.
Doug Breitbart: I am not making that… this is real, he…
Jerry Michalski: Made a lot of headway on humor from real life.
Jerry Michalski: Doug, please.
Doug Breitbart: I, what came up for me, a colleague of mine
Doug Breitbart: had a lot of contact with the Kogis.
Doug Breitbart: Which is an indigenous tribe, and they… they have gone on these, missions to Europe and around the world to raise money to buy their land back, basically, their ecosystem and regional, envi… you know, territory.
Doug Breitbart: And so they go on these trips to raise money, basically. And…
Doug Breitbart: Over the course of the trips, and there are these mamins, there were this sort of,
Doug Breitbart: the… the leaders of the tribe, and direct connect to source, and…
Doug Breitbart: And they sort of channel, you know, what's needed and what's next in decision-making and all the rest.
Doug Breitbart: And… over the course of several trips, you know, one of the Mamins was sort of… Corrupted.
Doug Breitbart: you know, exposed to Western conveniences, and Western this, and Western that, and, you know, they had to sort of pull him out.
Doug Breitbart: of the travel core.
Doug Breitbart: To, you know, re… reintegrate him back into the tribal… You know… Gestal.
Doug Breitbart: And… You know, so the… so the question, the question for me is.
Doug Breitbart: You know, what is that pull?
Doug Breitbart: about.
Doug Breitbart: You know, what is… what is the…
Doug Breitbart: Literal corruption on a soul basis, on a values basis, on an identity basis.
Doug Breitbart: Because… Corrupting is the verb. And what's being corrupted when people become corrupt?
Doug Breitbart: You know, what in their makeup, what in their identity, what in their awareness or consciousness?
Doug Breitbart: Is either turned off, or is neutralized, or is negated, or is abandoned, or stunted, or missing.
Doug Breitbart: In terms of an individual's makeup, that renders them corruptible.
Doug Breitbart: And the question… and sort of the flip side question, which is, what strengthens, you know.
Doug Breitbart: cultural and societal Alignment on our values, and… And, and relational level.
Doug Breitbart: That renders a culture, a society, somewhat more Teflon or immune.
Doug Breitbart: To influences that corrupt the fabric that binds.
Doug Breitbart: So, with that, I'm complete.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Doug. It feels like you've just described half of Western literature.
Jerry Michalski: I'm like, oh man, so many good plots came out of what you just said.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Jerry, could I jump in? Because we've got to leave for a doctor's appointment.
Jerry Michalski: Please, the man in the hat.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah, just a quick comment before Ken shows up with a poem.
Jerry Michalski: Well, it is.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I don't know either, but it's a ritual thing. What Doug said reminds me of Doris Lessing's notion of the substance of we feeling.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: That she talked about in the Remarkable Shacosta trilogy, and that that appears or breaks in society, is that, you know, that notion of a kind of mutual care, responsibility, and so forth as an anti-corruption.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: component. And last, on the matter of corruption, I'm a biomimicist. I tend to look at the 3.8 billion years of open source R&D that Earth's living systems have generated, that's available for us, for free.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: To draw from, if we choose to.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: But if I look at those systems, I see that parasitism and predation are part of the game.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And so what we've been calling corruption is our… is the name that we are giving to that phenomenon.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And maybe that phenomenon is natural and inevitable.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And then what? Or maybe it's something that is natural and inevitable, like in living systems, is constrained and limited, or self-limiting.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Parasites can't destroy the host, because they die if they do.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Part of the problem with our modern systems is that we don't have the
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I don't even know the word for it. We don't have the kind of coupling between systems, the appropriate feedback loops, and so forth, that provide the damping.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And constraint of these inevitable phenomena, so they go haywire.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And that's where we are now, and I… Doug, Doug, I like your phrase, but I can't say I'm complete, because I'm not, but there you are. I'm done speaking, at least.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Thank you, everybody. We have to leave. I'll catch you on the recording.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks. Thanks, Gil.
Jerry Michalski: And we only have a few minutes left in this particular call.
Jerry Michalski: Anybody want to summarize, plot a path forward, critique, Whatever you'd like.
Scott Moehring: For what it's worth, I… Go toe-to-toe with… Ill from time to time.
Scott Moehring: But I do definitely agree with him on this, and it's something I've been trying to…
Scott Moehring: Wrestle with, is the idea of Seeing the system.
Scott Moehring: Accepting the system.
Scott Moehring: And then… Deciding what you want to do, but understanding that
Scott Moehring: As he said, some of these things just… they exist.
Scott Moehring: And our hubris that we could somehow create a system of 8 billion where it doesn't… exist.
Scott Moehring: seems… like a… Perhaps the wrong direction.
Scott Moehring: How do we… How do we dance with it?
Scott Moehring: Instead of damming it.
Scott Moehring: You know, how do you surf on the wave instead of…
Scott Moehring: Trying to have a still pond.
Scott Moehring: I don't know, that's all just spontaneous out of my brain there, so I'm not sure where that's going, but I think that there's something important.
Scott Moehring: about staying… We need to have a world where these things don't exist.
Scott Moehring: Versus… We need to live in a world where these things do exist.
Stacey Druss: as long as we're doing that dance to go to something else Gil said in the chat.
Stacey Druss: he made the distinction between corruption and scamming, which I think is an important one, because corruption is something done by the powerful. We're scamming, there is a lack of power, which is why they have to scam in the first place. I mean, I…
Stacey Druss: I think that there's a difference there. And if you're gonna look at the whole dance.
Stacey Druss: I think you have to look at that piece, too.
Jerry Michalski: Offensive.
Mike Nelson: The scam, though, leads to power and money that then goes back into corruption, so there's…
Jerry Michalski: It's a little infinite loop, and then you do… and then you do jail time, lose your money, and you have to go back to scamming, I mean…
Stacey Druss: Whatever it is, it's fluid, and so…
Mike Nelson: The point is exactly right, but there's no way to separate the two.
Scott Moehring: What I'm hearing from Stacy, though… Stacy, clarification. Are you seeing a… are you referencing a sense of scale in that? To me, corruption feels…
Scott Moehring: larger and more coordinated, and scamming feels more peer-to-peer, but I don't know, that's how I'm taking it. I'm curious how you…
Stacey Druss: I'm just saying… I'm not even… I'm not even answering the question, I'm just raising the question, and just bringing it out, just saying, let's look at the whole thing, you know.
Stacey Druss: I'm just asking the question.
Mike Nelson: The route is often the same, the fact that people have no shame. And I mentioned in the Nigerian case, the scamming happened because…
Mike Nelson: well… I think they…
Mike Nelson: understood the idea of shame, and there were a lot of religious people who thought that that was stealing. There was also a sense of, hey.
Mike Nelson: We're taking money that was stolen from us, so… So, there.
Stacey Druss: Right, and I'm all…
Mike Nelson: And I do worry that we have… I mean, that would be a great question, too. You know, have we reached the end of shame? And with certain members of the political class here in Washington, starting with Mike Johnson and J.D. Vance.
Mike Nelson: They clearly have no shame.
Jerry Michalski: Actually, shamelessness is a positive strategy of the far right. It's a very intentional thing.
Jerry Michalski: It's a really intentional thing, and it's working like crazy. And this is a tangent, but it worries me no end, because nonviolent social action
Jerry Michalski: Absolutely depends on shame.
Jerry Michalski: It absolutely depends on shame.
Mike Nelson: Harding.
Jerry Michalski: on, you're counting on people seeing how crappy those people's behavior is, and being ashamed, and changing their minds, and voting differently, or overthrowing the government, or whatever. But if we're entering the post-shame era.
Jerry Michalski: I'm afraid a lot of our assumptions about what might work and how to do things
Jerry Michalski: Might just break, might not work at all, and that's got me pretty scared.
Mike Nelson: I marched in the No Kings March here in Washington, and a lot of the posters assumed
Mike Nelson: that shame was still a powerful force. But you're right.
Jerry Michalski: I know.
Mike Nelson: If George Santos Can have… be given leniency.
Mike Nelson: And all these Republicans are like, oh yeah, right, you're right.
Mike Nelson: That means shame is gone. I mean, this guy, I mean, he stole from tens of thousands of good, loyal Republicans.
Stacey Druss: Sure, just ask me.
Jerry Michalski: Trump has over and over again.
Stacey Druss: Just one thing really quickly. Even when you say something like, shame is gone, I just want to remind you, yes, shame is gone in that way, but now, shame about their sexuality, they have that.
Stacey Druss: So when we make these blanket statements, I just want us to remember that, yes, if we're looking at one thing, it's true, but we can look at something else, and it's not true. And that's something that we humans seem to do a lot. We make this blanket statement, and we don't recognize that if we flip it around.
Stacey Druss: It's absolutely a wrong statement.
Jerry Michalski: Love that. Thank you, Stacey.
Jerry Michalski: Pete?
Pete Kaminski: It, it's, it's terrible that we've lost a sense of shame in politics. It's really striking and horrifying.
Pete Kaminski: And I… on corruption, I… I… that's a really interesting topic, and I want to make sure that we
Pete Kaminski: don't… don't end up aiming for zero corruption. I think, in… in any complicated system, there's gonna be some
Pete Kaminski: some graft and corruption, and if it's done right, it actually kind of lubricates the whole… the whole system and keeps it going. It's when…
Pete Kaminski: it's when the corrupted folks don't have a sense of shame, or proportion, or balance, or something like that, that it… it grows and turns into something malevolent. It's kind of like… it reminds me of living in a world with a lot of
Pete Kaminski: viruses and bacterias and stuff like that, you know, if everything is kind of, like.
Pete Kaminski: homeostatic, then, you know, it's like, yeah, your body kind of deals with it. It's actually good to have a little bit of low-level irritation going on. But when it gets out of control, you know, when some kind of balance goes off, then it's bad.
Pete Kaminski: The reason I raised my hand was because, Jerry, when you said it, you know, is there anything we want to wrap up with, I… the thing my… one of my
Pete Kaminski: top carry takeaways from this was, Mike said something like, how to defeat crony capitalism would be a great topic, and I want to second that. That's a… that seems like it kind of, like, narrows down and fits a lot of stuff. So, I want to raise my hand for that.
Jerry Michalski: Love that. And, next Thursday is not the first of the month yet.
Jerry Michalski: So, I think we've found our topic for the 30th.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you for that.
Doug Breitbart: Can I offer a slight tweak?
Doug Breitbart: Instead of…
Jerry Michalski: That or a benediction.
Doug Breitbart: Instead of defeating crony capitalism, how about rendering it obsolete?
Mike Nelson: Even better. Even better.
Jerry Michalski: Sounds great.
Jerry Michalski: I'm changing the wording in my notes.
Jerry Michalski: This has been really fun. Thank you for,
Jerry Michalski: Thank you for joining, and as usual. Victoria, thank you for joining us.
Jerry Michalski: You're very happy you're here.
Victoria (Spain): for having me.
Jerry Michalski: We are… we are really glad to have you here, and… Alright, alright.
Jerry Michalski: The duking it out in the… everywhere in the chat and in the conversation worked wonderfully, so thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Anyone else with a closing thought?
Jerry Michalski: We don't have Ken for a while, with a poem, sadly. So, Victoria, Ken Homer has been a long-standing member of this group, and he's sort of decided to step out of things for a bit. He's also moving.
Jerry Michalski: to Spain, I think. I think he and his wife are moving to Valencia.
Jerry Michalski: And he had this… he is,
Jerry Michalski: wanted to be an actor when he was young, so he has a great presence and speaking voice, and also loves poetry, so he would find poems and read them to us at the end of a lot of OGM calls. So if you watch the recordings, you'll see poems at the end. If you go through my notes in the brain, you'll find, for every OGM call, a link up to the poem that Ken read to us.
Jerry Michalski: And it's been a really lovely custom. If anybody else feels like picking up that, that,
Jerry Michalski: I was gonna say duty, it's not a duty, it's a…
Jerry Michalski: It's a mission, it's a… something else.
Pete Kaminski: honor.
Mike Nelson: Sometimes he would write his own poems.
Jerry Michalski: be grateful. And in some cases, he would read us his original poetry, which was stellar.
Jerry Michalski: It's just siller.
Jerry Michalski: So, thank you all, and we'll see you next week when we'll talk about how to deflate, defuse, defeat, not defeat, disarm crony capitalism.
Stacey Druss: it obsolete.
Jerry Michalski: obsolete, that's it. That's in my notes. I forgot the word. Thanks.
Mike Nelson: Bye-bye.